



                               CHITIMACHA


                             _Chitimacha_—

The Chitimacha are the only Louisiana Indians known to currently live in
the vicinity of their ancestral homelands. It is evident they were one
of the largest tribes in Louisiana. Their large population was probably
the result of a favorable environment which provided an abundant food
supply of plants, animals and marine life without the necessity of
extensive hunting or fishing expeditions, or the necessity to
periodically abandon their village sites for lack of food. The men did
the hunting and fishing.

Although the women planted such crops as maize and sweet potatoes, many
of their foods grew wild. Foods such as beans, wild potatoes, pond lily
seeds, palmetto grains, rhizoma of common sagittaria and large leaf
sagittaria, persimmons, strawberries, blackberries, mulberries, white
berries, many kinds of tree fruits, pumpkins, and several others grew
close to their villages.

The Chitimacha inhabited two groups of villages. One group was located
along the upper reaches of Bayou Lafourche near the Mississippi River
while the other group was located on Grand Lake and the Bayou Teche
area. These areas consist of many bayous and swamps which were easy to
protect.

They made their houses from poles covered with palmetto leaves on the
roofs and walls. All the necessary building materials were readily
available and easily replaced when damaged or destroyed by storms and
hurricanes.

Women exerted strong influence in the tribe’s affairs because important
political positions were available to them. Usually the men controlled
the governmental offices, however if a chief died his widow could assume
his responsibilities if she were a capable leader. Women could also work
as medicine men. Only the leadership of religious affairs was denied
them.

The political system was run by a group of powerful men. One head chief
controlled the affairs of the entire confederation, with sub-chiefs
governing the outlying villages. These leaders inherited their offices,
lived in large homes, and carried heavily decorated peacepipes to all
ceremonies and social affairs as reminders of their importance. They
ruled by personal edicts, which were enforced by sub-administrators
appointed especially for that purpose. They maintained groups of
warriors to protect them, and to defend their villages against raids by
neighboring tribes.

The head chief, sub-chiefs, sub-administrators and war leaders were
entrenched by the rules of a rigidly stratified society. The Chitimacha
were the only southeastern tribe with a true caste system. The leaders
and their respective families comprised the “noble class”; all others
belonged to the “commoner” class. Noblemen addressed commoners in
popular language, but commoners spoke to noblemen only in terms that
were used solely for that purpose. With rare exceptions, noblemen
married only noblemen because the husband joined the clan of the wife,
therefore he would become a commoner. A nobleman was inclined to remain
unwed if no woman of his class was free to marry.

Religious affairs were controlled by Holy Men (and assistants who were
to succeed them after their deaths). Holy Men were in charge of the
sacred ceremonies of their respective clans. They had the responsibility
of perpetuating the ancient parables and stories of miraculous events
which embodied the moral codes of their villages, and which contained
beliefs concerning man’s kinship to nature and to nature’s creatures.

The Chitimacha men wore long hair, weighted with pieces of lead to hold
their heads erect. They wore necklaces, bracelets and rings made of
copper, gold and silver. Women wore their hair in braids, used makeup of
red and white dyes, and wore bracelets, earrings and finger rings.

Their aesthetic appreciation is revealed in their manufacture of objects
from shells and stones and in their excellent baskets. Basket-makers
gathered swamp cane, split it into strands then dyed it either black or
yellow or red, and let it dry. When the strands were completely dry they
wove them into baskets in two layers, in such a way as to produce
symbolic designs on the exterior walls. Their first contact with
Europeans in 1699. Between 1701 and 1705 war broke out after a party of
French soldiers reinforced by Acolapissa and Natchitoches Indians took
twenty Chitimacha women and children prisoner. In retaliation,
Chitimacha warriors killed French missionary, St. Cosme, and his 3
companions in a battle near the Mississippi River. When news of the
incident reached New Orleans the governor of the new French colony
declared war.

When peace finally came thirteen years later many Chitimacha had been
killed, displaced, or enslaved. This mighty Chitimacha nation was not
only reduced in population; it had lost its power and political
importance among the southern Louisiana tribes.

In 1762 another important milestone in Chitimacha history occurred. The
Acadians from Nova Scotia began to arrive at New Orleans and move out
along the bayous to escape persecution from British colonial
authorities. These cajun French people married Chitimachas and within a
century full bloods became scarce. The Chitimachas began to speak “cajun
French” instead of their own language. Many converted to the Roman
Catholic religion.

By 1880 the remaining Chitimacha people were struggling for survival.
Since they were too poor to own any of the large sugar plantations they
worked on them during summer and harvest time for wages, some of them
cut timber, manufactured baskets or raised small quantities of
vegetables and sugar cane the rest of the year to supplement their
wages. They were an impoverished remnant of the old culture.

In 1905 the Chitimacha fought a court battle to retain the last 505
acres of their once vast territory. An out of court settlement was made
and they were given title to 280.36 acres of the disputed tract. This
too was almost lost when the attorney in the litigation presented them a
bill plus interest almost a decade later. However, Miss Sarah Avery
McIlhenney, a wealthy philanthropist intervened and purchased the
judgement on the land for $1450. She agreed to assign ownership to the
United States government on behalf of the Chitimacha, therefore
preventing the loss of the last of their land.

In response to Miss McIlhenney’s efforts government officials took an
interest in the Chitimacha affairs for the first time. On May 8, 1916,
Congress placed the land in trust for the benefit of the tribe and
established a roll of all known living members. Only 60 members were
named. However, they did not receive any actual government assistance
until a reservation school was established in 1934.

Until the 1940’s they still relied upon traditional occupations because
there were few job opportunities near the reservations. Many Chitimacha
shuttled back and forth between the reservation and area lakes where
fishing was good, while others lived out on the lakes. It took all day
to get to the outlying lakes from the reservations in their “push-skiff”
or pirogue.

World War II marked a general turning point in tribal history as
returning war veterans infused the tribe with new ideas, enthusiasm and
a desire to insure tribal identity for the future. On November 28, 1946
Chief Earnest Darden resigned as chief and urged the tribe to appoint
someone to engineer the formation of a constitutional form of
government, thus ending the traditional chief-type of rule that had
existed since prehistoric times.

Through the years there were many obstacles to obtaining the education
necessary for the Chitimacha to secure well paying jobs. Until recently
those desiring a high school education had to attend the Haskell High
School in Kansas. Since few tribesmen could afford to send their
children to Kansas for a high school degree a cycle of low education and
low paying jobs continued.

After World War II several Chitimachas began working in the oil industry
on “in-shore” drilling crews and more were working “off-shore”
operations by the early 1950’s. Their success soon attracted others to
more middle income jobs and today there are Chitimacha working as
mechanics, plant workers, carpenters, mental health directors, community
health representatives and administrators and other such professions.

On January 14, 1971 the Chitimachas became members of the first
organized tribe in the state of Louisiana to be recognized by the United
States government.

They were also one of the founding members of the Inter-Tribal Council
in May, 1975 and have continued to play an important role in the agency.


                              